In the previous section, we introduced matrix embedding as a means for
decreasing the number of embedding changes and thus reducing the statistical impact of embedding a message into a cover Work. Besides making fewer
embedding changes, the sender may attempt to restrict the embedding to those
parts of the cover Work where it is intuitively more difficult to detect the
changes. The rule used to select the placement of embedding changes is called
the selection rule. If the selection rule is only known to the sender but not to
the recipient, we speak of a nonshared selection rule.
To motivate the need for nonshared selection rules in steganography,
imagine the following situation. The sender has a raw, never compressed
image and wants to embed information in its JPEG compressed form. Can the
knowledge of the raw image help us better conceal the embedding changes?
Intuitively, it should. For example, when compressing the image, the sender
can inspect the DCT coefficients after they are divided by the associated quantization steps but before they are rounded to integers, and select for embedding
those coefficients whose fractional part is close to 0.5. Such coefficients experience the largest quantization error during JPEG compression and the smallest
combined error (rounding + embedding) if rounded to the other value. When
rounding the coefficient 5.47, for instance, we can embed a bit by rounding it
to 5 or to 6. The rounding distortion (without embedding) is 0.47. If embedding requires rounding to 6, the combined rounding and embedding distortion
is only slightly larger, 0.53. The obvious problem with this idea, however, is that
the recipient will not be able to tell which DCT coefficients in the stego JPEG
file were used for embedding, because it is not possible to completely undo the
loss due to rounding by JPEG compression. This is an example of a situation in
which the sender cannot share the selection rule with the recipient.
The problem of nonshared or partially shared selection rules occurs quite
frequently in steganography. Consider, for example, adaptive steganography [71,
220] where the pixels in the cover Work are chosen using a selection rule based
on their neighborhood. Because the act of embedding itself modifies the pixel
values, then, depending on the selection rule, it is possible that the recipient
will not recover the same set of message-carrying pixels as the sender. As an
example, consider the following selection rule. The sender calculates for each
pixel in the cover Work the variance of all pixels in its local 3 × 3 neighborhood
and embeds m message bits using LSB embedding into the LSBs of m pixels.
with the largest local variance. When the same selection rule is applied by
the recipient of the stego image, it may well happen that the m pixels with
the largest local variance will not be completely the same as those selected
by the sender. This may prevent the recipient from extracting the message.